Do you find it easy to think up effective illustrations for the ministry?
I sure don't.
But some have a real gift for it.
I have a friend like that.
He can look at almost any situation and think of an illustration.
One day, we were traveling along Mounton Road.
I was driving.
My car wasn't very good. It was the best I could afford at the time.
And suddenly, a red warning light came on.
Quick as a flash, my friend said, I just thought of a great illustration.
The conscience is like a warning light.
His first thought, an illustration.
His second thought, oh, oh, we're in trouble.
Illustrations come naturally to him.
It's just like breathing to him.
Some have the gift and the rest of us have to work at it.
But why should we work at it?
Why should we learn to use illustrations?
Well, for one thing, because Jesus used them, and he was the greatest teacher of them all.
Jesus used illustrations all along, as we find when we read Matthew chapter 13 and verse 34.
I'll give you a moment.
Let's read this together. Matthew chapter 13 and verse 34.
All these things, Jesus spoke to the crowds by illustrations.
Indeed, without an illustration, he would not speak to them.
Jesus knew that an illustration is often the most effective way to touch the heart.
And that's especially true if people are featured in the illustration.
Now, suppose I say, if you're going along the road and you see someone in trouble,
stop and help him, even if he's of a different race.
That's clear. It makes the point.
Jesus' illustration about the neighborly Samaritan makes the same point,
but it's so much more effective.
It stirs the emotions. It engages the mind.
We feel pity for the poor Jew who fell among thieves.
We feel love for the Samaritan who stopped to help him and discussed
for the priest and Levite who didn't stop,
where it determined not to be like them.
An illustration can put a human face on a problem
and reinforce our determination to apply the lesson.
A good illustration can help a Bible student grasp a point he's been struggling with.
Let's see how that works.
In a conversation, Nita is having with Jade in a coffee shop.
Let's do this.
Bit of a neat freak.
You don't say.
So, last time we discussed how God created us to live forever,
which raises the question, why do we die?
Totally.
Totally what?
No, like I mean, I totally agree. That's what we talked about.
Right.
Let's open to Romans 5, verse 12.
Wait, why don't I read it out loud so we can both enjoy it?
That is why, just as through one man,
sin entered into the world and death through sin.
And so death spread to all men because they had all sinned.
Okay, hold it. Is Adam the one man?
Exactly.
This doesn't make sense.
You said Adam was perfect and wouldn't die.
That's right.
But then he sins and loses that.
So what's that got to do with me?
I die because he's stupid.
Well, maybe not how I would have put it.
Maybe we can think of it this way.
When parents with a severe genetic defect have children,
what happens?
Usually the kids inherit it.
Precisely.
When Adam sinned, that sin became like a genetic defect
that caused sickness, aging, and death.
And since we're all his children,
oh, brilliant.
I get it.
Why don't we watch a little video that helps put it all together?
Why was Nita's illustration effective?
Jade was struggling to understand how she could inherit imperfection from Adam,
a man who lived long ago,
and she wasn't going to get past it.
So that was the point Nita chose to illustrate.
So when you're studying with someone,
choose carefully what you'll illustrate.
Let it be a main point in the lesson,
or an idea that your student is having trouble with.
There has to be a good reason for using an illustration.
Our illustrations should be appealing.
What do we mean by that?
An illustration will appeal to the student
if it's about something familiar.
Now again, Jesus' parable of the Samaritan comes to mind.
The setting of the illustration was nearby,
a familiar road between Jerusalem and Jericho,
not the hanging gardens of Babylon or the pyramids of Egypt,
and it was realistic.
There were many robberies along that road,
and the attitude of the priest and Levite toward that poor, injured Jew
totally believable.
Nita also chose wisely.
Her illustration was about inheriting a birth defect,
something she knew Jade would understand.
Now you may have a couple of go-to illustrations
that you've used for years and years and years.
Why not look for fresh ones that make the same points?
Put a little sparkle back on your ministry.
Let's consider two ways of doing that.
First, be observant.
Matthew 6.26, Jesus says,
observe intently the birds of the heavens.
Jesus was aware of his surroundings,
and he thought about what he saw.
He observed the housewife,
children playing in the village square,
the farmer,
the rich man with his treasures.
So learn from Jesus,
slow down and smell the flowers.
Then think of an illustration about flowers.
But what if you feel you don't have a creative bone in your body,
and yet you still need fresh illustrations?
Our second resource,
our publications.
Turn to the Watchtower Publications Index under Illustrations,
and you'll find an abundance of beautiful illustrations
that have been used in our publications.
And as you're studying our later publications,
take note of the illustrations that are used.
Choose simple illustrations.
Use little things to explain big things,
and simple things to explain complicated things.
A sister at a congregation meeting
used a very simple but effective illustration
regarding Jehovah and the ransom.
She said,
When you're shopping,
you never pay full price for damaged goods.
Her point?
We're all damaged goods.
Yet Jehovah paid full price for us
with the life of his son.
The illustration was simple.
It was appealing because it was about something familiar,
shopping.
It was also appropriate to the audience,
and there were a lot of batholites in the audience,
and it's never paid full price for anything.
When you're illustrating a point,
avoid distracting the student with minor details.
Minor details, if they don't fit,
they can get you into a lot of trouble.
If they don't work with the main point of the illustration,
the student may focus on the inconsistencies
and miss the point altogether.
Well, in summary, what do we say?
It takes time to develop good illustrations,
but it's worth the effort.
If you have the gift, use it,
and share it with others.
But if like me, you don't have the gift, work at it.
You'll be glad you did.
And so will your Bible students.
Now, brother Kenneth Flodin,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
will present the next part of the symposium,
experience the joy of disciplemaking,
improve your skills,
teaching with enthusiasm.